---
title: "Dataviz: My Reads (2016)"
excerpt: "What I read in 2016 at a glance"
tags: [goodreads, data visualization, books]
classes: wide
---

2016 has been the year of my love to read revival. Thanks to [GoodReads](https://www.goodreads.com), [R](https://www.r-project.org) and [Highcharts](http://highcharts.com/) (wrapped by [Highcharter](http://jkunst.com/highcharter)) it is possible to visualize some interesting and beautiful data...


## Year evolution
Let's start simple with a global view of what happened during the year.


### Total books
The following chart shows the cumulative sum of books, being the total 93.

<div class="chart">
	<iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_VIV4137.html"></iframe>
</div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_VIV4137.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


Why is there such a rise in March? maybe because I had my *Kindle Unlimited* free 30-day trial on that days...


### Total pages
The same can be done with the sum of pages.

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_XOY1138.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_XOY1138.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


The shape here is slightly different. Sure it will be interesting to put both in the same plot.


### Pages per book
So, we have number of books and pages. Next natural question is about pages per book. Let's calculate it and see all data together in one chart:

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_QON7566.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_QON7566.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


It is true that I read a lot of books in March but, as the pages per book average fall shows, they were very short.

Notable page average increment occurs in May (blame it on *The Count of Monte Cristo*) and in September. The last one is due to **Patrick Rothfuss** and his two wonderful books. By the way, that was the moment when my love of reading finally came to stay. Thank you, Patrick.


## Analysis per month
If we see data divided by month, peaks become clearer.

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_XIJ5823.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_XIJ5823.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


Definitely, I read more on October and less (nothing!) on February, shame on me.


## Histograms
They are a useful way to see how things are distributed. Let's see some examples...


### Books by number of pages
If we divide books by size, how many of them are there in each group?

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_CYV3111.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_CYV3111.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


There are 27 books with pages between 200 and 299 (it is the biggest bin) and there are only two books with more than 1100 pages.


### Books by publication year
What about divide books by their publication year?

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_ZIB9427.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_ZIB9427.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


It is clear I read more modern books than classics.


### Books by rating
Let's take a look at the ratings (number of stars) I gave.

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_WFA2407.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_WFA2407.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


The most common rating I gave was 4 (to 42 books). The worst rating was 2 and it was given only in 9 cases and there were 8 books that, in my opinion, deserved the best rating.


### Authors by number of books
This histogram divides authors by the number of books I read from them.

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_TEO5385.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_TEO5385.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


The last histogram says that I normally read books from different authors (73 cases), I read two books from the same author on 5 occasions and there are only two more cases in some of the others alternatives.


The author I read the most is Stephen King with six books. That is because I want to complete *The Dark Tower* series (and all the books connected with it!) before the movie is released.


## Comparing books characteristics
Let's face fiction vs nonfiction books, standalone vs series and author gender.
<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_VEJ6269.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_VEJ6269.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


Surprisingly I read more nonfiction than fiction books, it's usually the opposite. I read more standalone books than series and much more books written by male than by female authors. I did not know this until now. I will try to equilibrate this in the future.


## Summary
Finally, I had some fun creating colorful charts that summarize my reads...


### Heatmap
Here, in a scale from 0 to 100, darker colors indicate lower values and lighter colors indicate higher values. The following chart shows all the books in a glance.

<div class="chart">
	<iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_UDE6059.html" style="height: 270px;"></iframe>
</div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_UDE6059.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


Some highlights to be noted:

 * *The Count of Monte Cristo* is by far the oldest and largest book (it has the "darkest year" and the "brightest pages")
 * *To Kill a Mockingbird* is by far the most rated book (with more than 3M ratings!).
 * Patrick Rothfuss' books are the best rated ones (with average ratings higher than 4.5)
 * *Bag of Bones* by Stephen King is the book I liked much more than the community did. It is my five star book with the lowest average rating in GoodReads.


### Scatterplot
Another easy way to see all 2016 reads is distributing them in a plot by ratings count (x-axis) and average rating (y-axis). Size is related to number of pages and color to publication year. Again, darker means older.

<div class="chart"><iframe src="/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_DQS9516.html"></iframe></div>
[Open](/htmlwidgets/2017-03-12-My-Reads-2016/highchart_DQS9516.html){: .btn .btn--inverse target="_blank"}


It is possible to zoom (click & drag) the zones with more density of circles to make it easier to see the books in them.


It is interesting to note that most of the books I read have average rating between 3.5 and 4.5.


As a curiosity, it seems that *Hyperion* by Dan Simmons and *The Waste Lands* by Stephen King are the most similar according to this plot. In fact, they both have about 4.2 average rating, 125K ratings count, near 500 pages and only 3 years of difference.

